Modern object-oriented languages such as X10 require a rich framework
for types capable of expressing value-dependency, type-dependency
and supporting pluggable, application-specific extensions.

In earlier work, we presented the framework of \emph{constrained
types} for concurrent, object-oriented languages, parametrized by
an underlying constraint system $\cal C$. Constraint systems are a
very expressive framework for partial information. Types are viewed
as formulas \texttt{C\{c\}} where \texttt{C} is the name of a class
or an interface and \texttt{c} is a constraint in $\cal C$ on the
immutable instance state of \texttt{C} (the \emph{properties}).
Many (value-)dependent type systems for object-oriented languages
can be viewed as constrained types.

This paper extends the constrained types approach to handle
\emph{type-dependency} (``genericity''). The key idea is to extend
the constraint system to include predicates over types such as
\texttt{X} is a subtype of \texttt{T}.  Generic types are supported
by introducing parameters and properties that range over types and
permitting the user program to impose constraints on such variables.

To illustrate the underlying theory, we develop a formal family
FXG($\cal C$) of programming languages with a common set of sound
type-checking rules.  By varying $\cal C$ and extending the type
system, we obtain languages with the power of FJ, FGJ, dependent
types, and new object-oriented languages that uniformly support
value- and type-dependency.  Concretely, we illustrate with the
design and implementation of the type system for X10.  The type
system integrates and extends the features of nominal types, virtual
types, and path-dependent types.
