%\title{Sequential semantics for concurrent programs}

The safe paralleization of sequential programs is an important and
challenging task. A parallelization is safe if it ensures that no new
behaviors are introduced; the semantics of the parallel program is
identical to that of the sequential program. In particular the
parallel program must not exhibit scheduler indeterminacy or deadlock.

This is a challenging problems.  Imperative memory locations are
famously indeterminate under concurrent read/write
operations. Further, most concurrent programming languages support
synchronization mechanisms that enable a thread to wait until some
appropriate condition is true, thus leading to the possibility of
deadlock.

In this paper we develop a very rich fragment of the concurrent,
imperative programming language \Xten{} in which {\em all} programs
have sequential semantics. The advantages of such a language are
striking: the programmer simply cannot introduce determinacy or
deadlock-related errors. All programs can be debugged as if they are
sequential programs, without having to reason about all possible
interleaving of threads. 

The fragment includes all of \Xten{}'s most powerful constructs --
(clocked) \code{finish} and \code{async}, places and {}\code{at}. We
introduce two new abstractions -- {\em accumulators} and {\em clocked
  values} -- with lightweight compiler and run-time
support. Accumulators of type \code{T} permit multiple concurrent
writes, these are reduced into a single value by a user-specified
reduction operator. Accumulators are designed to be determinate and
deadlock-free at run-time, under all possible uses.  Clocked values of
type \code{T} operate on two values of \code{T} (the {\em current} and
the {\em next}). Read operations are performed on the current value,
write operations on the next. Such values are implicitly associated
with a clock and the current and next values are switched
(determinately) on quiescence of the clock. Clocked values capture the
common ``double buffering'' idiom. Accumulators and clocked values are
designed in such a way that they are deadlock-free and determinate
even in the presence of arbitrary aliasing and patterns of
concurrency.

We show all programs written in this fragment of the language are
guaranteed to have sequential semantics. That is, programs in this
fragment may be developed and debugged as if they are sequential,
without running into the state explosion problem. 

Further, many common patterns of concurrent execution can be written
in this language in an ``obvious'' way. These patterns include
histograms, all-to-all reductions, stencil computations, master/slave
execution, and most of the important HPC computing idioms. We show
that there are simple statically-checkable rules that can establish
for many common idioms that some run-time synchronization checks can
be avoided.

The key technical problem addressed is unrestricting aliasing in the
heap.  We develop the idea of an {\em implicit ownership domain}
(first introduced in the semantics of clocks in \Xten{} in a paper in
Concur 2005) that newly created objects may be registered with the
current activity so that they can be operated upon only by this
activity and its newly spawned children activity subtree.  This
permits determinacy and deadlock freedom to be established locally,
independent of the context in which the code is being run.


